Design doc for organizations (#5958)
readthedocs/readthedocs.org: docs/development/design/organizations.rst

Organizations
=============

Currently we don't support organizations in the community site
(a way to group different projects),
we only support individual accounts.

> Several integrations that we support have organizations,

Reviewer: This is true but perhaps an example or two would be good:

```suggestion
Several integrations that we support like GitHub and Bitbucket have organizations,
```

> where users group their repositories.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
where users group their repositories and manage them in groups rather than individually.
```

Why move organizations in the community site?
---------------------------------------------

We support organizations in the commercial site,

> having no organizations in the community site makes the code maintenance difficult.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
having no organizations in the community site makes the code maintenance difficult for Read the Docs developers.
```

Having organizations in the community site will make the differences between both more easy to manage.

Users from the community site can have organizations in external sites from where we import their projects
(like GitHub, Gitlab).
Currently users have all projects from different organizations in their account.
Having not a clear way to group/separate those.

There is also a product decision.
Supporting organizations only on code,

> but enable the feature only on the commercial site.

Reviewer 2: I think we don't want this. Having organizations in the community site is a huge win from my point of view.

Reviewer 3: Agreed. I think we'll likely need two steps, one where we merge the code, then one where we turn it on, but the end goal should definitely be having organizations on the community side.

Reviewer 4: I would say this needs to be a two step thing. If we try to enable organization on the community side, it's only going to set this code back.

Author: Do you mean first move organization and then enable them? The current doc describes like that the migration, we don't enable orgs just after that.

Reviewer 4: The doc should clarify, it doesn't answer this. I think we were disagreeing with manuel's feedback. Long term we plan on enabling organizations. Short term we are only moving the code over.

Reviewer 4: I had an outdated view on this change. Underlying changes look good.

How are we going to support organizations?
------------------------------------------

Currently only users can own projects.
With organizations this is going to change to: 
Users and organizations can own projects.

With this, the migration process would be straightforward for the community site.

For the commercial site we still have a decision.
Are we going to support users and organizations to own projects?

> Or just organizations?

Reviewer 2: I need to think a little more about this. At first sight, it will bring some issues with the unique slugs for the commercial site. If a user owns a project in commercial, what would be the slug we will generate? `username` + `project.slug`?

Author: Well, we have to support this on the community site with only `project.slug`, so for the commercial site it would be the same, only `project.slug`.

Author: But on the commercial site the slug doesn't matter that much anyway, users use a custom domain instead.

Reviewer 2: I don't think it's a good idea to allow just `project.slug` in the corporate site for slugs.

Basic plan does not have a Custom Domain.

Making collisions on Commercial will only confuse users, IMO.

Reviewer 3: Users and Orgs can both own projects. It's the only reasonable way to transition it I think, unless we hit some kind of serious issue with the code that won't support it.

Reviewer 4: On the commercial site, i feel like it should *only* be organizations, as there is no per-user subscription. Can we make this a setting -- even if we just use the setting to alter the list of target relations for the project? On commercial, we'd limit this to organzations the user has perimssions to import into, on community the list would be a list of user/organizations the user can import into.

Author: > as there is no per-user subscription

That's a good point. Yeah, I think we can manage that with a setting.

What features of organizations are we going to support?
-------------------------------------------------------

> We have this features present in the commercial site:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have the following features in the commercial site that we don't have on the community site:
```

- Owners
- Teams
- Permissions
- Subscriptions

Owners should be included to represent owners of the current organization.

Teams, this is also handy to manage access to different projects under the same organization.

Permissions,
currently we have two type of permissions for teams: admin and read only.
Read only permissions doesn't make sense in the community site since we only support public projects/versions
(we do support private versions now, but we are planning to remove those).

> So, we should only support admin permissions for teams.

Reviewer 2: These permissions are basically a field: `Team.access`. It's not another entity by itself.

Reviewer 3: Agreed that teams should only support admin currently. 👍

Reviewer 4: What about API access? Don't we want to be able to add read-only users to the organization for API access? If we can avoid creating differences between the installations, that is a large benefit.

Author: The current idea for api access is to create scope based tokens.

Subscriptions, this is only valid for the corporate site,
since we don't charge for use in the community site.

How to migrate current projects
-------------------------------

Since we are not replacing the current implementation,
we don't need to migrate current projects from the community site nor from the corporate site.

How to migrate the organizations app
------------------------------------

The migration can be split in:

> #. Remove/simplify code from the migrations app on the corporate site.

Reviewer 2: What does this mean? I'm not following here. Is this database migrations Django files?

Author: Sorry, typo. It's organizations

#. Isolate/separate models and code that isn't going to be moved.
#. Start by moving the models, managers, and figure out how to handle migrations.
#. Move the rest of the code as needed.
#. Activate organizations app on the community site.
#. Integrate the code from the community site to the new code.

We should start by removing unused features and dead code from the organizations in the corporate site,
and simplify existing code if possible (some of this was already done).

Isolate/separate the models to be moved from the ones that aren't going to be moved.
We should move the models that aren't going to me moved to another app.

- Plan
- PlanFeature
- Subscription

This app can be named *subscriptions*.

> We can get around the table names and migrations by setting the explicitly the table name to `organizations_<model>`,

Reviewer 2: I think it's not terrible to rename a table, and will be cleaner. If it's trivial, I'd say that we should do it.

Author: That would generate some downtime.

Reviewer 3: I think we can clean it up later. It doesn't need to be done now.

and doing a fake migration.
Following suggestions in https://stackoverflow.com/questions/48860227/moving-multiple-models-from-one-django-app-to-another.
Code related to subscriptions should be moved out from the organizations app.

> After that, it should be more easy to move the organizations *app* (or part of it)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After that, it should be easier to move the organizations *app* (or part of it)
```

> to the community site (and not changes in table names would be required).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to the community site (and no changes to table names would be required).
```

We start by moving the models.

- Organization
- OrganizationOwner
- Team
- TeamInvite
- TeamMember

Migrations aren't moved, since all current migrations depend on other models that aren't
going to be moved.
In the community site we run an initial migration,

> for the corporate site we run a fake migration.

Reviewer 2: How are we going to have different migrations files for the same `organizations` app if it will be same code base?

Author: The models are already created on the commercial site, we can't run the migrations there again. We can remove the old migration files on the commercial site after the migration.

Reviewer 2: Why not just run the migrations on the community site without removing any migration file? When all these migrations are ran in the corporate site as well, they will do nothing.

Author: The app is different and it the migration files from .com depend on other models and migrations that aren't on .org.

Reviewer 3: I think the plan is to just squash the migrations and start with the current state as initial.

For managers and querysets that depend on subscriptions,
we can use our pattern to make overridable classes (inheriting from ``SettingsOverrideObject``).

Templates, urls, views, forms, notifications, signals, tasks can be moved later

> (we just need to make use from the models from the `readthedocs.organizations` module).

Reviewer 2: The first iteration will be to move as much as we can but making only corporate run with Organizations enabled?

Author: Yep, otherwise it would be a big PR

Reviewer 2: It would  be good if this is mentioned in the document if not already.

Author: There is a mention that the migration can be split in those steps. Is that enough or should I put that those steps can be separated PRs?

> Templates, urls, views, forms, notifications, signals, tasks can be moved later

Reviewer 3: I think it would be useful to have a bit more of this fleshed out. I think that moving the models is definitely the best first step, but it won't do us much good without migrating the queryset permission logic as well.

If we decide to integrate organizations in the community site,
we can enable the app.

After the app is moved,
we can move more code that depends on organizations to the community site.

Namespace
---------

Currently we use the project's slug as namespace,

> in the commercial site we use the combination of `organization.slug` + `project.slug` as namespace.

Reviewer 2: nit: you need to use double quotes here if you want to render this as code. Otherwise, it's rendered with italic, which is not a great visual difference (and actually, this is code)

For the community site probably this approach isn't the best,

> since we alway serve docs publicly from `slug.readthedocs.io`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
since we always serve docs publicly from `slug.readthedocs.io`.
```

to the community site (and no changes to table names would be required).

We start by moving the models.

- Organization
- OrganizationOwner
- Team
- TeamInvite
- TeamMember

Migrations aren't moved, since all current migrations depend on other models that aren't
going to be moved.
In the community site we run an initial migration,
for the corporate site we run a fake migration.

For managers and querysets that depend on subscriptions,
we can use our pattern to make overridable classes (inheriting from ``SettingsOverrideObject``).

Templates, urls, views, forms, notifications, signals, tasks can be moved later
(we just need to make use of the models from the ``readthedocs.organizations`` module).

If we decide to integrate organizations in the community site,
we can enable the app.

After the app is moved,
we can move more code that depends on organizations to the community site.

Namespace
---------

Currently we use the project's slug as namespace,
in the commercial site we use the combination of ``organization.slug`` + ``project.slug`` as namespace.

For the community site probably this approach isn't the best,
since we always serve docs publicly from ``slug.readthedocs.io``.

> And most of the users don't have a custom domain.

Reviewer 4: What is our plan for slugs for organization projects in community then? Are we not using the organization slug at all? I have concerns about supporting both patterns at once. A collision is introduced if you slug a project with slug `foo-something` and an organization project for organization slug `foo` and project name `something` -- ie both produce the same slug.

Author: I'm suggesting to use the project slug for users and orgs for .org. So we have `foo-something` and `something`.

Author: Lie if a user from the pallets org creates a project named flask, the slug would be `flask`, no `pallets-flask`.

We could keep the current behavior for the community site and use ``organization.slug`` + ``project.slug`` for the corporate site,
since in the corporate site we don't care so much about a unique namespace between all users, but a unique namespace per organization.
We can refactor the way we get the namespace to be more easy to manage in both sites.

Future Changes
--------------

Changes that aren't needed immediately after the migration,
but that should be done:

> Edit the current querysets, modify/add UI elements, and add new endpoints to the API (v3 only).

Reviewer 4: Modifying the UI is not going to be a future change, it will be tied directly to this work. We should probably have an idea of at least what UI components are likely to require changes. We won't be able to just copy the UI bits into community as we've discussed structural changes -- supporting user projects and organization projects for instance.

Author: I just put some pieces not sure if we want to copy most of the UI from .com or make something different (especially for listing and detail of orgs)?

Reviewer 4: If we're not going to enable this on the community site yet, and we're going to do a two step process -- move the code over, and then sometime later actually enable organizations on the community codebase -- then we can worry about UI later.

Do we want to source templates for organizations from the commercial repo or move to the community repo?

Author: Yes, it's a two step migration.

> Do we want to source templates for organizations from the commercial repo or move to the community repo?

Good question, I think we can move the urls/views later, that way the templates can live in .com in the meantime and is easy to _not enable_ organization in the community site.
